ChangeLog 3.x to 4.x - Closes #560 (#720)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/references/changelog.adoc

| 8
| {set:cellbgcolor:red} REMOVED
| second passphrase transaction
| 9
| {set:cellbgcolor!}
x
| register delegate transaction
| 10
| {set:cellbgcolor:yellow} UPDATE
| multisignature transaction
| 12
| {set:cellbgcolor:yellow} UPDATE
| vote transaction
| 13
| {set:cellbgcolor:green} ADDED
| unlock transaction
| 14
| ADDED
| proof of misbehaviour transaction
| 15
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

=== Update: Multisignature transaction

The registration of a multisignature account has changed as displayed in the code snippet below.

For more detailed information about the introduced changes please refer to {url_github_lip17}[LIP 17: Make multisignature accounts more flexible, prevent spamming, and prevent signature mutability^].

[tabs]
=====
v4.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.MultisignatureTransaction({
    asset: {
        mandatoryKeys: [
            '9d3058175acab969f41ad9b86f7a2926c74258670fe56b37c429c01fca9f2f0f',
            '141b16ac8d5bd150f16b1caa08f689057ca4c4434445e56661831f4e671b7c0a',
            '3ff32442bb6da7d60c1b7752b24e6467813c9b698e0f278d48c43580da972135',
        ],
        optionalKeys: [],
        numberOfSignatures: 3,
    },
    nonce: '2',

>     fee: '250000',

Reviewer: I think as general practice, senderPublicKey should be included when instantiating
because with the new multi-sig, it's possible that senderPublicKey does not associate with the signature

Author: Imho it is not necessary to provide the senderPublicKey in this step, because it gets added automatically once the transaction is signed with the `sign()` method.

Reviewer: it does now for the single signature account, but for multi-signature account it will be required to put the sender public key. (sender public key cannot be derived from the passphrase anymore

Author: What does this mean from UX perspective? Can it be derived from the Address?
If so, do I need to add my address/public key to every transaction before I can sign it with my passphrase?
Sounds not like an optimal solution to me UX-wise. 
Can you provide with a good UX solution for this? 
Otherwise I would keep it like this for now, as for 4.x this is still absolutely valid.

Author: I see! I will add a new section about creating multisig transactions in the changelog, and also in the app-development guides, to cover the topic. I wouldn't update the general examples, to keep it simple.

});
console.log(tx);
/*

> MultisignatureTransaction {

Reviewer: Do we need to show this class instance?

Author: Not necessarily.. I removed it now 👍

  senderPublicKey: '',
  signatures: [],
  nonce: 2n,
  fee: 250000n,
  type: 12,
  _id: undefined,
  confirmations: undefined,
  blockId: undefined,
  height: undefined,
  receivedAt: undefined,
  asset: {
    mandatoryKeys: [
      '9d3058175acab969f41ad9b86f7a2926c74258670fe56b37c429c01fca9f2f0f',
      '141b16ac8d5bd150f16b1caa08f689057ca4c4434445e56661831f4e671b7c0a',
      '3ff32442bb6da7d60c1b7752b24e6467813c9b698e0f278d48c43580da972135',
    ],
    optionalKeys: [],
    numberOfSignatures: 3,
    networkIdentifier: '7158c297294a540bc9ac6e474529c3da38d03ece056e3fa2d98141e6ec54132d'
  },
  MAX_KEYS_COUNT: 64
}
*/
----
--
v3.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.MultisignatureTransaction({
    asset: {
        keysgroup: [
            '9d3058175acab969f41ad9b86f7a2926c74258670fe56b37c429c01fca9f2f0f',
            '141b16ac8d5bd150f16b1caa08f689057ca4c4434445e56661831f4e671b7c0a',
            '3ff32442bb6da7d60c1b7752b24e6467813c9b698e0f278d48c43580da972135',
        ],
        lifetime: 34,
        min: 2,
    },
    networkIdentifier: '7158c297294a540bc9ac6e474529c3da38d03ece056e3fa2d98141e6ec54132d'
});
----
--
=====

=== Update: Vote transaction

> The voting process has changes as shown in the code snippet below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The voting process now has certain changes which can be seen in the code snippet below.
```

[tabs]
=====
v4.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.VoteTransaction({
    asset:{
        votes:[
            { delegateAddress:'11750255083444888021L', amount: '-1000000000'},
            { delegateAddress:'64373847834494888026L', amount: '3000000000'}
        ]
    }
});
----
--
v3.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.VoteTransaction({
    asset: {
        votes: ['+9d3058175acab969f41ad9b86f7a2926c74258670fe56b37c429c01fca9f2f0f',
        '-141b16ac8d5bd150f16b1caa08f689057ca4c4434445e56661831f4e671b7c0a',
        '-3ff32442bb6da7d60c1b7752b24e6467813c9b698e0f278d48c43580da972135',
        ],
    },
    networkIdentifier: '7158c297294a540bc9ac6e474529c3da38d03ece056e3fa2d98141e6ec54132d',
});
----
--
=====

== BigInt replaces BigNum

In v4.0.0 xref:{url_bigint}[BigInt] is used to handle large numbers, like account balances and transfer amounts.

BigInt is a built-in JavaScript object and replaces the previously used `BigNum` object.

IMPORTANT: The balances of accounts are now saved as **BigInt**(previously `string`) in the Lisk SDK v4.0.0.

== applyAsset() becomes asynchronous

> The `applyAsset()` function of custom transaction has become asynchronous, so you need to adjust the function in your implementation to something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `applyAsset()` function of custom transaction has become asynchronous, so it is necessary to adjust the function in your implementation to something similar as shown below:
```

[tabs]
=====
v4.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
async applyAsset(store) {
        const sender = await store.account.get(this.senderId);
        // [...]
}
----
--
v3.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
applyAsset(store) {
        const sender = store.account.get(this.senderId);
        // [...]
}
----
--
=====

== The store returns account as Account instances

> The accounts that are returned from the xref:{url_guides_tx_store}[store] in transactions are now returned as instances of the Account class instead of pure objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The accounts that are returned from the xref:{url_guides_tx_store}[store] in transactions are now returned as instances of the account class instead of pure objects.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The accounts that are returned from the xref:{url_guides_tx_store}[store] in transactions are now returned as instances of the `Account` class instead of pure objects.
```

> Because of this, it is recommended to mutate the received account instance directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to this, it is recommended to mutate the received account instance directly.
```

[tabs]
=====
v4.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
async applyAsset(store) {
        const sender = await store.account.get(this.senderId);
        sender.asset = { hello: this.asset.hello };
        store.account.set(sender.address, sender);
        // [...]
}
----
--
v3.x::
+
--
[source,js]
----
applyAsset(store) {
        const sender = store.account.get(this.senderId);
        const newObj = { ...sender, asset: { hello: this.asset.hello } };
        store.account.set(sender.address, newObj);
        // [...]
}
----
--
=====

== Dynamic fees

Static fees are replaced with dynamic fees (see: {url_github_lip13}[LIP 13: Replace static fee system by dynamic fee system^]).

> The properties of custom transactions can now be updated like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The properties of custom transactions can now be updated as shown below:
```

* Removed: The static `FEE` property in a custom transaction.
* Added: The static property `MIN_FEE_PER_BYTE`.

> It defines the minimum amount of tokens that need to paid per Byte of a particular transaction type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This defines the minimum amount of tokens that need to paid per byte of a particular transaction type.
```

> It defaults to `1000`, but can be overwritten as desired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This defaults to `1000`, but can be overwritten as desired.
```

* Added: The static property `NAME_FEE`.

> It defines an absolute amount of tokens that always need to be paid as transaction fee, in addition to the fees generated by the `MIN_FEE_PER_BYTE` property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This defines a specific amount of tokens that always need to be paid as a transaction fee, in addition to the fees generated by the `MIN_FEE_PER_BYTE` property.
```

> It defaults to `0`, but can be overwritten as desired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This defaults to `0`, but can be overwritten as desired.
```

Among the Lisk default transactions, only one transaction has a custom `NAME_FEE`: the delegate registration (Type 10) and with a `NAME_FEE` of `1000000000`.

.File: base_transaction.ts
[source,typescript]
----
export abstract class BaseTransaction {
    //[...]]
    public static MIN_FEE_PER_BYTE = BigInt(1000);
    public static NAME_FEE = BigInt(0);
    //[...]]
}
----

The specified fee must always be equal or higher to the defined minimum fee of the corresponding transaction type:

....
Minimum fee of a transaction = MIN_FEE_PER_BYTE * sizeof(trs) + NAME_FEE
....

== Nonce replaces the timestamp in transactions

> The timestamp which has been a required property previously has been replaced by a nonce.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The timestamp which was previously a required property has been replaced by a nonce.
```

Every account in the network has an individual nonce, which is a number that increments +1 each time the respective account sends a transaction to the network.

[TIP]
====
New accounts start always with a nonce equal to 0.
After sending the first outgoing transaction, which should therefore include the nonce = 0, it will increment automatically +1.
====

[source,typescript]
----
const helloTransaction = new HelloTransaction({
    asset: {
        hello: 'Hello SDK 4.0',
    },
    fee: '116000',
    nonce: '0',
});
----

> Nonces prevent transaction replays and enable users to invalidate transactions, in case of need.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nonces prevent transaction replays and enable users to invalidate transactions, if so required
```

For more information about the reasoning behind this change, check out {url_github_lip15}[LIP 15: Enable transaction invalidation by using nonces instead of timestamps^].

== Updated signature of `.sign()`: network identifier and passphrase

The network identifier, which had to be specified when creating the transaction object in SDK 3.x, is now specified in the `sign()` method of the created transaction instance:

[source,typescript]
----
const networkIdentifier = cryptography.getNetworkIdentifier(
    "19074b69c97e6f6b86969bb62d4f15b888898b499777bda56a3a2ee642a7f20a",
    "Lisk",
);

const passphrase = 'My secret passphrase';

helloTransaction.sign(networkIdentifier,passphrase);
----

== Accounts must maintain a minimum balance

{url_github_lip25}[LIP 25: Introduce minimum balance requirement for accounts^] introduces a new constant `minBbalance`, which is defining a minimum balance for all accounts in the network.

> If the minimum balance for accounts is set to a reasonable value, it prevents the network from certain spam attacks, like creating a lot of new accounts with basically no balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the minimum balance for accounts is set to a reasonable value, it prevents the network from certain spam attacks, such as the creation of many new accounts with zero balance.
```

__optional__|Fields to sort results by.|enum (balance:asc, balance:desc)|`"balance:asc"`
|**Query**|**username** +
__optional__|Delegate username to query.|string (username)|
|===

==== Get multisignature groups (Removed)

[options="", cols=""]
|===
|{set:cellbgcolor:red} `GET /accounts/\{address}/multisignature_groups`
|===

==== Get multisignature memberships (Removed)

[options="", cols=""]
|===
|{set:cellbgcolor:red} `GET /accounts/\{address}/multisignature_memberships`
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

[[_account]]
==== Account definition

[options="header", cols=",,"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema
|**address** +
__required__|The Lisk address is the human readable representation of the accounts owners public key.
It consists of 21 numbers followed by a capital 'L' at the end. +
**Example** : `"12668885769632475474L"`|string (address)
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}**asset** +
__optional__|Any JSON stored in the account's asset field. +
**Example** : `{
  "custom" : true,
  "field" : true
}`|object
|**balance** +
__required__|The current balance of the account in Beddows. +
**Example** : `"1081560729258"`|string
|**delegate** +
__required__||<<_delegate,Delegate>>
|**isDelegate** +

> __optional__|The value indicating if the account is a deleage or not.|boolean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__optional__|The value indicating if the account is a delegate or not.|boolean
```

|**keys** +
__required__||<<_multisignatureasset,MultisignatureAsset>>
|**missedBlocks** +
__optional__|Total number of blocks that the delegate has missed. +
**Example** : `427`|integer
|**nonce** +

> __required__|The current nonce associated to account for transaction processing. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__required__|The current nonce associated to an account for transaction processing. +
```

**Example** : `"154"`|string
|**producedBlocks** +
__optional__|Total number of blocks that the delegate has forged. +
**Example** : `20131`|integer
|**productivity** +
__optional__|Productivity rate.
Percentage of successfully forged blocks (not missed), by the delegate. +
**Example** : `96.41`|number
|{set:cellbgcolor!}
**publicKey** +
__required__|The public key is derived from the private key of the owner of the account.

> It can be used to validate that the private key belongs to the owner, but does not provide access to the owners private key. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be used to validate that the private key belongs to the owner, but does not provide access to the owners private key. +
```

**Example** : `"968ba2fa993ea9dc27ed740da0daf49eddd740dbd7cb1cb4fc5db3a20baf341b"`|string (publicKey)
| {set:cellbgcolor:red}**secondPublicKey** +
__optional__|The second public key is derived from the second private key of an account, if the owner activated a second passphrase for her/his account. +

> It can be used to validate that the private key belongs to the owner, but does not provide access to the owners private key. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be used to validate that the private key belongs to the owner, but does not provide access to the owners private key. +
```

A delegate chooses the username by registering a delegate on the Lisk network.
It is unique and cannot be changed later. +
**Example** : `"isabella"`|string (username)
|**voteWeight** +
__required__|The voters weight of the delegate.
Represents the total amount of Lisk (in Beddows) that the delegates' voters own.
The voters weight decides which rank the delegate gets in relation to the other delegates and their voters weights. +
**Example** : `"1081560729258"`|string
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

==== DelegateWithVoters definition
[options="header", cols=",,"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema
|**address** +
__required__|The Lisk address of a delegate. +
**Example** : `"12668885769632475474L"`|string (address)
|**balance** +
__required__|Account balance.
Amount of Lisk the delegate account owns. +
**Example** : `"1081560729258"`|string
|**publicKey** +
__optional__|The public key of the delegate. +
**Example** : `"968ba2fa993ea9dc27ed740da0daf49eddd740dbd7cb1cb4fc5db3a20baf341b"`|string (publicKey)
|**username** +
__required__|The delegates username.
A delegate chooses the username by registering a delegate on the Lisk network.

> It is unique and cannot be changed later. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is unique and cannot be changed. +
```

|**height** +
__required__|Current block height of the node.
Represents the current number of blocks in the chain on the node. +
**Minimum value** : `1` +
**Example** : `123`|integer
|**secondsSinceEpoch** +
__required__|Number of seconds that have elapsed since the Lisk epoch time (Lisk timestamp). +
**Example** : `1533558858`|integer
|**syncing** +
__required__|True if the node is syncing with other peers. +
**Example** : `false`|boolean
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}**unconfirmedTransactions** +
__required__|Number of unprocessed transactions in the pool. +
**Minimum value** : `0` +
**Example** : `1`|integer
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

=== Signatures

==== Post a signature (removed)

[options="", cols=""]
|===
|{set:cellbgcolor:red} POST /signatures
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

[[_signature]]
==== Signature definition (removed)

[options="header", cols=",,"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema
|{set:cellbgcolor:red}**publicKey** +
__required__|Public key of the account that intends to sign the multisignature transaction. +
**Example** : `"2ca9a7143fc721fdc540fef893b27e8d648d2288efa61e56264edf01a2c23079"`|string (publicKey)
|**signature** +
__required__|Signature to sign the transaction.

> The signature can be generated locally, either by using Lisk Commander or with Lisk elements. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The signature can be generated locally, either by using Lisk Commander or with Lisk Elements. +
```

Unix timestamp. +
**Example** : `28227090`|integer
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}**signatures** +
__required__||< string (signature) > array
|{set:cellbgcolor!}
**type** +
__required__|Describes the Transaction type. +
**Minimum value** : `0`|integer
|===

[[_transactionrequest]]
==== TransactionRequest definition

[options="header", cols=",,"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema
|**asset** +
__required__|Displays additional transaction data.
For example, this can include the vote data or delegate username.|<<_transactionrequest_asset,asset>>
|{set:cellbgcolor:red}
**id** +
__required__|Unique identifier of the transaction.
Derived from the transaction signature. +
**Length** : `1 - 20` +
**Example** : `"222675625422353767"`|string (id)
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}
**fee** +
__required__|Fee for the transaction. +
**Example** : `"1000000"`|string
|**nonce** +
__required__|Unique sequence of number per account. +
**Example** : `"0"`|string
|{set:cellbgcolor!}
**senderPublicKey** +
__required__|The public key of the senders' account. +
**Example** : `"2ca9a7143fc721fdc540fef893b27e8d648d2288efa61e56264edf01a2c23079"`|string (publicKey)
|{set:cellbgcolor:red}
**signSignature** +

> __optional__|Contains the second signature, if the transaction is sent from an account with second passphrase activated. +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__optional__|Contains the second signature, if the transaction is sent from an account with a second passphrase activated. +
```

==== Unlocking definition (added)

[options="header", cols=",,"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}**amount** +
__required__|Amount the account voted the delegate for in multiples of 10 Lisk. +
**Example** : `"1000000000000"`|string
|**delegateAddress** +
__required__|Lisk address of the delegate the queried account unvoted. +
**Example** : `"12668885769632475474L"`|string (address)
|**unvoteHeight** +
__required__|Height at which the unvote should be valid. +
**Example** : `50000.0`|number
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

=== Voters

==== Query
....
GET /voters
....

===== Description
_Attention: At least *one of the filter parameters must be provided.*_
Returns all votes received by a delegate.

===== Parameters

[options="header", cols=",,,,"]
|===
|Type|Name|Description|Schema|Default
|**Query**|**address** +
__optional__|Address of an account.|string (address)|
|**Query**|**limit** +
__optional__|Limit applied to results.|integer (int32)|`10`
|**Query**|**offset** +
__optional__|Offset value for results.|integer (int32)|`0`
|**Query**|**publicKey** +
__optional__|Public key to query.|string (publicKey)|
|{set:cellbgcolor:red}**Query**|**secondPublicKey** +

> __optional__|Second public key to query|string (publicKey)|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__optional__|Second public key to query.|string (publicKey)|
```

|{set:cellbgcolor:red}**balance** +
__required__|Balance of the account that voted for the queried delegate. +
**Example** : `"1081560729258"`|string
|{set:cellbgcolor!}
*publicKey** +
__required__|Public key of the account that voted for the queried delegate. +
**Example** : `"968ba2fa993ea9dc27ed740da0daf49eddd740dbd7cb1cb4fc5db3a20baf341b"`|string (publicKey)
|{set:cellbgcolor:green}**votes** +
__required__|All votes the voter for the queried delegate voted for.|< <<_vote,Vote>> > array
|===
{set:cellbgcolor!}

=== Votes

==== Query
....
GET /votes
....

===== Description
_Attention: At least *one of the filter parameters must be provided.*_
Returns all votes placed by an account.

===== Parameters

[options="header", cols=",,,,"]
|===
|Type|Name|Description|Schema|Default
|**Query**|**address** +
__optional__|Address of an account.|string (address)|
|**Query**|**limit** +
__optional__|Limit applied to results.|integer (int32)|`10`
|**Query**|**offset** +
__optional__|Offset value for results.|integer (int32)|`0`
|**Query**|**publicKey** +
__optional__|Public key to query.|string (publicKey)|
|{set:cellbgcolor:red}**Query**|**secondPublicKey** +

> __optional__|Second public key to query|string (publicKey)|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__optional__|Second public key to query.|string (publicKey)|
```
